hello i'm keith kendrick i'm editor of
bbc good food magazine
and i'm joined today by sabrina gayle
the renowned british iranian chef and
author
whose latest cookbook is simply called
simply
she's also a guest on the new good food
rookie chef
podcast discussing the cooking of her
heritage and giving a master class
in how to cook the famous persian rice
dish
tardic is that right sabrina tardik
tad egg i don't want to correct nadia
today i've asked her to share with us
three essential things we all need to
know
about persian cooking we've got a lot of
time in the kitchen at the moment
so let's get adventurous so what can you
share sabrina thanks for coming on board
thank you so um
i think the first things first
having grown up in england i you know
spent most of my life here i've shopped
in the same supermarkets
i've watched the same food telly and i
know
i'm i kind of feel more british really
but i do
understand people's phobias and what
they're scared of and obviously if we're
leading with rice
as one of the dishes that we've put out
that would probably be
top of uh britain's list of things
they're scared of making
um the one thing i wanted to say is
persian food is not complicated
it really isn't you don't need a
thermometer
you don't need to cook things in seven
ways and make 50 pots of food
it's not like that at all so
if i could if i was telling somebody
who's completely alien to this cuisine
and just
wants a little bit of reassurance i
would say actually it's probably one of
the
more simple um less
complex places to start not just from
the perspective
um that it's quite humble but also
there's just not that much involved it's
quite a simple
cuisine but it is its simplicity is
almost interpreted as elegance
um by many other cultures so um
don't be afraid it's really really easy
and it's a lot more familiar than you
think
that would be my first thing to explain
to people
okay uh my second thing which is
i always think this is the one that's
for shocker
um is if i asked a room full of a
thousand people what's your
what word would you use to describe
middle eastern food what word comes to
mind apart from like yummy or things
like that were descriptive
most of those people would go spice
yeah i think i was gonna go with
aromatic but you know
same sort of i mean aromatic is actually
a really good way of describing persian
food
but spice actually isn't terribly on the
money
um persians really don't like spice
don't use it the only spice that we do
use
purely because we cultivate it is
saffron and we use that absolutely right
in an aromatic
capacity it's used to
perfume meats and add aroma to dishes
probably from the the times
pre-refrigeration where
especially meat would have been hung for
a while and
wouldn't have a particularly pleasant
smell because there was no refrigeration
i think that's where the tradition of
sort of packing in the saffron came
because it
really it is very heady and aromatic um
is it enormously expensive as well yes
it is
yeah yes it is we cultivate over 92
of the world's saffron and it really is
um incredibly special and it's been
proven that the saffron from iran is of
the highest quality
purely because it just gives you the
highest release
of potency that you need so there are
many pretenders and unfortunately
you'd be surprised at how many one and
two michelin star chefs really don't
know how to use saffron i've had
quite shocking conversations with them
and just in a helpful capacity sort of
said look
you really need to understand saffron is
like a tea
and you need to brew it grind it down
and brew it in hot water to
really release it otherwise it's just
like throwing
you know paper money into a pot and down
the drain essentially so
and and too much is also a
hallucinogenic so
too much will be a party you don't want
to be against that
um so yes that that spice is really
important to us and the other spice we
used to cultivate a lot of but not so
much anymore is cumin but we only
really use it in one traditional dish
which is a very simple
cumin rice um and that that's
kind of a strange thing for a lot of
people especially
people that might know persian food by
way of any of my writings because
i love harissa which is north african i
love pool bebe which is
turkish you know i have sort of mixed in
preserved lemons and all these things
and
you know the truth is they're just not
persian persian cuisine
is best described as aromatic but
incredibly simple
and it's herbs it's uh citrus
tomato and really sour we love
sour and we love grilled meats
it's wonderful and i'm sure a lot of the
recipes are in your
your cookbook simply presumably lots of
simple recipes
uh interestingly enough simply isn't
actually my easy book
because i've always felt that how do you
simplify simplicity itself all of my
recipes are pretty much
uh you know fairly simple fairly easy
only because i'm a lazy cook and i want
the fastest route to everything and i
realize that's a human condition
so um but simply is um
it's a better way of explaining what
kind of food is in the book because it's
neither
eastern nor western and yet it is
eastern and western
and if you're trying to describe what
kind of food i make it's kind of
impossible because i use harissa
fish sauce dry limes you know butternut
squash which is very western for us
so it's just simply sabrina food which
is why that got that label
so what's the third thing about persian
cooking that uh that we all need to know
about because
you know saffron cumin that's really
really interesting and
uh i've got some saffron actually i
imagine that it degrades quite quickly
so i may
need to get something fresher i don't
know you would be
surprised good saffron that can have a
two or three year
shelf life but the most important
elements for saffron is the quality you
purchase
and even though persian saffron is
expensive
it's actually cheaper than the not great
stuff that you might find
in certain shops and supermarkets so
it's it's an
odd one but you just have to know where
to look to find it
and it's the storage the how you store
it it doesn't like
sunlight it doesn't like extreme heat it
likes to be stored in a
dry cool dark kind of um
environment really and that will just
mean that you'll you'll you'll be able
to use it for quite some time
and persians freeze it yeah so
lots of ways to keep it is there a third
thing that we need to know about persian
food
oh definitely there is a third thing um
so persian food is essentially
um quite easy on the pocket
and i think now more than ever
it's quite important because i've never
been the kind of girl to write recipes
to send you out to get 5 000 ingredients
that you don't have don't know what they
are and will never use again
i think for me as an author but more as
a reader
that has always been my frustration
looking at recipes and thinking
how the hell am i ever going to use
extractive back swings ever again
in a recipe you know what you know we've
all done it open the cupboard and go
yeah 96 i think that was and like
i spent tenner on it and so what i love
about persian cuisine it's
really really simple it's incredibly
accessible
but also it's a bit of a contrast a bit
of a
strange dichotomy because our culture
is embedded in the refinery and luxury
of the persian empire
which was the largest land mass
spanning empire and you know very very
famous
for being you know they really love
their luxury they had an
inordinate wealth um and they did trade
with all
countries all over the world um trading
things like saffron pistachios and um
i was going to say asparagus but not
asparagus pomegranates
and and whatnot it was particularly um
very food oriented a lot of their trays
so all the traditions that exist in
classic persian homes a lot of them do
still derive from the persian empire
banqueting and feasting just the way we
serve rice we always serve it in a
mountain
you know it's never flat we never serve
food in bowls where you can't see it
it's always on a flat plate
even if it's a small portion because
it's about the
uh abundance of the visual appeal of
entertaining
so it's strange because then you've got
that kind of like upper end of luxury
but then essentially it's home cooking
it's a lot of the times it's not peasant
food but it is
really home cooking and the same food
that they would maybe eat in a palace
you would also eat at home
there's no sort of distinguishing
between the two we don't
whip out beef you know fillet of beef or
something for a special occasion it's
just
for royal occasions back in you know
pre-revolution
and and entertaining in weddings it
would just be all the same food but just
like
10 000 times the quantity because we're
feeders that's the other thing you need
to know
nobody's gonna feed you ain't no party
like a persian party
um so if you know anyone in fact anyone
middle eastern you know and they invite
you over for dinner like
go because you'll never eat as well
well all our homes are palaces at the
moment aren't we so we need to make the
most of them
we need to cook great things we need to
get great ingredients and we need to uh
you know to follow your fantastic advice
so uh thanks for
thanks for coming on board uh you've
done a much longer chat with uh with
nadia our
rookie chef and i listened to that the
other day it was half an hour
of just it was so entertaining it was so
useful it was so interesting and i just
thought
this is great so i look forward to this
chat that we've just had and
and thank you very much for coming along
oh thank you so much for having me